\chapter*{Introduction} \addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{Introduction} \label{chap:intro}

Lanthanide elements have, within the last fifty years, become an intensely
active area of research. These elements have desirable properties that can be
exploited to make as laser gain mediums, fluorescent indicators, television
phosphors, as well as many other applications\cite{Bunzli:2005ic}. As such, a theoretical
understanding of lanthanide elements is vital to engineering practical uses for
these elements.

Understanding the chemical and physical properties of these elements requires
experimental and theoretical investigations of the electron configuration and
interaction inside the electron cloud surrounding a lanthanide atom. A major
way to determine these electron configuration properties is through
spectroscopy, which allows experimenters to investigate the internal structure
of lanthanide atoms through the atom's absorption and emission of light.
Unfortunately, not all lanthanide ions are readily amendable to standard
spectroscopic techniques due to low probabilities of absorbing passing photons.
Such is the case for europium.

The recent advancements of absorption spectroscopic methods has allowed finicky
elements like europium to be probed. In the past few years, several research
groups have shown that it is possible to probe low concentrations of soluble
absorbers in a liquid medium using cavity techniques to enhance the absorption
signal, allowing investigations of aqueous lanthanide solutions to be better
understood.

This report provides an introduction to absorption spectroscopy and some
preliminary experimental results on the investigations of aqueous europium ions
and coordination complexes. The information collected provides a pathway for
moving forward with investigations of europium complexes, and provides
potential use cases that combined absorption spectroscopy with europium
complexes for spectroscopic assays.

\section*{Outline}

The chapters in this report are laid out as follows.

\begin{description}
  \item[Chapter 1] provides an introduction to absorption spectroscopy, some
                   common experimental techniques that are used, and the
                   advantages and disadvantages of these techniques relative to
                   each other.
  \item[Chapter 2] provides an introduction to broadband cavity enhanced
                   absorption spectroscopy. This technique was used for the
                   investigations of aqueous europium ions and complexes, and
                   chapter 2 details the setup used and algorithms for
                   processing acquired data. In addition, this chapter
                   discusses future improvements that can be made to the
                   experimental setup.
  \item[Chapter 3] discusses calibration measurements that were performed, and
                   several sources of error in the measurements collected.
  \item[Chapter 4] discusses the theoretical understandings of europium
                   electronic transitions, and some experimental results from
                   measuring aqueous europium ions.
  \item[Chapter 5] concludes the report with a discussion of the acquired
                   results and steps to take in the future to both complete
                   theoretical investigations of europium complexes and how one
                   may use the results of this report to build sensitive assays.
\end{description}
